bvtejaswi/major_upgrade_4x_docs (#7331)
chef/automate: components/docs-chef-io/content/automate/major_upgrade_4.x.md

{"_shards":{"total":60,"successful":30,"failed":0}}
After this upgrade completes, you will have to run Post upgrade steps to ensure your data is migrated and your Automate is ready for use (y/n)
y

Post Upgrade Steps:
===================

1) Check the status of your upgrade using:  
     $ chef-automate upgrade status
  
2) Disable the maintenance mode if you enabled previously using:
	$ chef-automate maintenance off
  
3) Migrate Data from Elastic Search to Open Search using this command:
     $ chef-automate post-major-upgrade migrate --data=es
  
4) Check Automate UI everything is running and all data is visible
  
5) If you are sure all data is available in Upgraded Automate, then we can free up old elastic search Data by running: 
     $ chef-automate post-major-upgrade clear-data --data=es
**** In case of any errors, please refer to docs.chef.io and release notes for this version. ****

Now, upgrade will start, Please confirm to continue... (y/n)
y

```

{{< note >}} To continue with the upgradation the /hab must and should contain atleast 5GB free space. {{< /note >}}

> {{< note >}} The 'X' GB is the minimum free space required in /hab which is calculated with the formula => [ ((/hab size or /hab/svc/automate-elasticsearch/data) + 10%) or 5GB ] . {{< /note >}}

Reviewer: @dishanktiwari2501 Check how we can improve this reference.

> {{< note >}} The 'X' GB is the minimum free space required in /hab which is calculated with the formula => [ ((/hab size or /hab/svc/automate-elasticsearch/data) + 10%) or 5GB ] . {{< /note >}}

Reviewer 2: Done @kalroy

**Upgrade Chef Automate from version 3.0.49 to 4.0.x**

1. Start major version upgrade:
```sh
sudo chef-automate upgrade run --major
```
Here, you will be prompted to accept multiple Pre Upgrade checklist. Ensure you have perfomed all those actions before upgrade then mark yes, otherwise it will prompt you the error.The checklist will be as following:

```shell
You had planned for a downtime, by running the command(chef-automate maintenance on)?: (y/n)
y
You have taken backup of your data and kept it safe, preferred on other disk or location? (y/n)
y
You are ready with your external open search with migrated data from elastic search, this should be done with the help of your Administrator (y/n)
y
After this upgrade completes, you will have to run Post upgrade steps to ensure your data is migrated and your Automate is ready for use (y/n)

> y

Reviewer 3: Here we display the post-upgrade steps and ask for confirmation from the user

```sh
sudo ./chef-automate upgrade run --airgap-bundle automate-4.x.y.aib --major
```
Here, you will be prompted to accept multiple Pre Upgrade checklist. Ensure you have perfomed all those actions before upgrade then mark yes, otherwise it will prompt you the error.The checklist will be as following:

```shell
You had planned for a downtime, by running the command(chef-automate maintenance on)?: (y/n)
y
You have taken backup of your data and kept it safe, preferred on other disk or location? (y/n)
y
Ensure you have more than 'X' GB percent free disk space (y/n)
y
This will disable Sharding on your elastic search (y/n)
y
{"acknowledged":true,"persistent":{"cluster":{"routing":{"allocation":{"enable":"primaries"}}}},"transient":{}}
{"_shards":{"total":60,"successful":30,"failed":0}}
After this upgrade completes, you will have to run Post upgrade steps to ensure your data is migrated and your Automate is ready for use (y/n)

> y

Reviewer 3: here it will show the post upgrade steps and asks for user confirmation

{"_shards":{"total":60,"successful":30,"failed":0}}
After this upgrade completes, you will have to run Post upgrade steps to ensure your data is migrated and your Automate is ready for use (y/n)
y

Post Upgrade Steps:
===================

1) Check the status of your upgrade using:  
     $ chef-automate upgrade status
  
2) Disable the maintenance mode if you enabled previously using:
  $ chef-automate maintenance off
  
3) Migrate Data from Elastic Search to Open Search using this command:
     $ chef-automate post-major-upgrade migrate --data=es
  
4) Check Automate UI everything is running and all data is visible
  
5) If you are sure all data is available in Upgraded Automate, then we can free up old elastic search Data by running: 
     $ chef-automate post-major-upgrade clear-data --data=es
**** In case of any errors, please refer to docs.chef.io and release notes for this version. ****

Now, upgrade will start, Please confirm to continue... (y/n)
y

```
{{< note >}} To continue with the upgradation the /hab must and should contain atleast 5GB free space. {{< /note >}}

> {{< note >}} The 'X' GB is the minimum free space required in /hab which is calculated with the formula => [ ((/hab size or /hab/svc/automate-elasticsearch/data) + 10%) or 5GB ] . {{< /note >}}

Author: I have mentioned what 'X' means in a note below the post upgrade steps

y

Post Upgrade Steps:
===================

1) Check the status of your upgrade using:  
     $ chef-automate upgrade status
  
2) Disable the maintenance mode if you enabled previously using:
  $ chef-automate maintenance off
  
3) Migrate Data from Elastic Search to Open Search using this command:
     $ chef-automate post-major-upgrade migrate --data=es
  
4) Check Automate UI everything is running and all data is visible
  
5) If you are sure all data is available in Upgraded Automate, then we can free up old elastic search Data by running: 
     $ chef-automate post-major-upgrade clear-data --data=es
**** In case of any errors, please refer to docs.chef.io and release notes for this version. ****

Now, upgrade will start, Please confirm to continue... (y/n)
y

```
{{< note >}} To continue with the upgradation the /hab must and should contain atleast 5GB free space. {{< /note >}}

{{< note >}} The 'X' GB is the minimum free space required in /hab which is calculated with the formula => [ ((/hab size or /hab/svc/automate-elasticsearch/data) + 10%) or 5GB ] . {{< /note >}}

> It starts upgrading 

Reviewer 3: please rephrase the sentence to be meaningful

```
This should return: Automate is up-to-date with airgap bundle `4.x.y` version

2. Turn off the maintenance mode.
```sh
sudo chef-automate maintenance off
```
This should return:
  
  ```result
  Updating deployment configuration 
  Applying deployment configuration
  ```

3. Migrate your data from *ElasticSearch 6.8* to *OpenSearch 1.2.4*:
```sh
sudo chef-automate post-major-upgrade migrate --data=es
```
```shell
It will start the migration immediately after check.
Press y to agree, n to disagree? [y/n]: y

HAB Root Path /hab/pkgs/chef/deployment-service/0.1.0/20220609123606

----------------------------------------------
Chef-automate stop 
----------------------------------------------

Chef Automate Stopped

----------------------------------------------
migration from es to os 
----------------------------------------------

Checking for es_upgrade

Done with Migration 
 Please wait for some time to reindex the data

----------------------------------------------
Chef-automate start 
----------------------------------------------

Starting Chef Automate

----------------------------------------------
Chef-automate status 
----------------------------------------------
```

> When migration is successful the default config will be shown

Reviewer 3: are you sure about this? I don't see any config with successful migration

Author: Yes with the latest changes made the config will be displayed

```sh
sudo ./chef-automate upgrade run --airgap-bundle automate-4.x.y.aib --major
```
Here, you will be prompted to accept multiple Pre Upgrade checklist. Ensure you have perfomed all those actions before upgrade then mark yes, otherwise it will prompt you the error.The checklist will be as following:

```shell
You had planned for a downtime, by running the command(chef-automate maintenance on)?: (y/n)
y
You have taken backup of your data and kept it safe, preferred on other disk or location? (y/n)
y
You are ready with your external open search with migrated data from elastic search, this should be done with the help of your Administrator (y/n)
y
After this upgrade completes, you will have to run Post upgrade steps to ensure your data is migrated and your Automate is ready for use (y/n)

> y

Reviewer 3: here also we display post upgrade steps and ask for user confirmation

```

It starts upgrading 
Once you are done with the upgrade, follow the steps post upgrade which are:

```shell
Post Upgrade Steps:
===================

1) Check the status of your upgrade using:  
     $ chef-automate upgrade status
   This should return: Automate is up-to-date
  
2) Disable the maintenance mode if you enabled previously using:
	$ chef-automate maintenance off

3. Check whether upgrade status is up-to-date
```sh
sudo chef-automate upgrade status
```

4. Upgrade your external *ElasticSearch 6.8* to *OpenSearch 1.2.4* manually. If you have configured *Host*, *Port*, *Username* or *Password* of ElasticSearch, patch the new configuration to use Chef Automate.

5. Turn off maintenance mode using following command:
```sh
sudo chef-automate maintenance off
```

> This should return:

Reviewer 3: Please check these steps again. on the preview these are showing side by side

3. Check whether upgrade status is up-to-date
```sh
sudo chef-automate upgrade status
```

4. Upgrade your external *ElasticSearch 6.8* to *OpenSearch 1.2.4* manually. If you have configured *Host*, *Port*, *Username* or *Password* of ElasticSearch, patch the new configuration to use Chef Automate.

5. Turn off maintenance mode using following command:
```sh
sudo chef-automate maintenance off
```
This should return:
  
  ```result
  Updating deployment configuration
  Applying deployment configuration
  ```
{{< note >}}
After upgrading to version 4.x, Automate will have the configurations both for OpenSearch and Elasticsearch. It is recommended to remove the Elasticsearch configuration after upgrading to External OpenSearch.
{{< /note >}}

## Troubleshooting

### Disc Space Validation

1)When /hab is less than 5gb

```
Hab (/hab/) directory should have more than 5.00GB free space
UnknownError: An unknown issue occurred during execution: Request to start upgrade failed: one of the checklist was not accepted/satisfied for upgrade: Hab (/hab/) directory should have more than 5.00GB free space.
```
You need to clear the space in /hab for having atleast 5GB free space.

> 2)When the disk free space is less than it required

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2)When the disk free space is less than the minimum required, the upgrade will fail with the below error:
```

y
After this upgrade completes, you will have to run Post upgrade steps to ensure your data is migrated and your Automate is ready for use (y/n)
y

Post Upgrade Steps:
===================

1) Check the status of your upgrade using:  
     $ chef-automate upgrade status
   This should return: Automate is up-to-date

2) Check all services are running using: 
     $ chef-automate status

3) Disable the maintenance mode if you enabled previously using:
	$ chef-automate maintenance off

4) Check Automate UI everything is running and all data is visible

**** In case of any errors, please refer to docs.chef.io and release notes for this version. ****

Now, upgrade will start, Please confirm to continue... (y/n)
y

```

It starts upgrading 
Once you are done with the upgrade, follow the steps post upgrade which are:

```shell
Post Upgrade Steps:
===================

1) Check the status of your upgrade using:  
     $ chef-automate upgrade status
   This should return: Automate is up-to-date
  
2) Disable the maintenance mode if you enabled previously using:
	$ chef-automate maintenance off

> 3. Check whether upgrade status is up-to-date

Reviewer 3: The formatting was not showing correctly on preview, for 3rd point
<img width="602" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/44021874/189196196-e7e18fa2-41b4-41aa-bc04-8478e35c0048.png">

```
### Migration Fails

> 1)When migration fails due to no minimum space available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1)When migration fails due to no minimum space available, the upgrade will fail with error:
```
